+++
abstract = "Tobacco smoking is a major risk factor for atherosclerotic disease and has been associated with DNA methylation (DNAm) changes in blood cells. However, whether smoking influences DNAm in the diseased vascular wall is unknown but may prove crucial in understanding the pathophysiology of atherosclerosis. In this study, we associated current tobacco smoking to epigenome-wide DNAm in atherosclerotic plaques from patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy. </br></br>DNAm at commonly methylated sites (cytosine-guanine nucleotide pairs separated by a phospho-group [CpGs]) was assessed in atherosclerotic plaque samples and peripheral blood samples from 485 carotid endarterectomy patients. We tested the association of current tobacco smoking with DNAm corrected for age and sex. To control for bias and inflation because of cellular heterogeneity, we applied a Bayesian method to estimate an empirical null distribution as implemented by the R package bacon. Replication of the smoking-associated methylated CpGs in atherosclerotic plaques was executed in the second sample of 190 carotid endarterectomy patients, and results were meta-analyzed using a fixed-effects model. </br></br>Tobacco smoking was significantly associated to differential DNAm in atherosclerotic lesions of 4 CpGs (false discovery rate <0.05) mapped to 2 different genes (AHRR, ITPK1) and 17 CpGs mapped to 8 genes and RNAs in blood. The strongest associations were found for CpGs mapped to the gene AHRR, a repressor of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor transcription factor involved in xenobiotic detoxification. One of these methylated CpGs were found to be regulated by local genetic variation.</br></br>The risk factor tobacco smoking associates with DNAm at multiple loci in carotid atherosclerotic lesions. These observations support further investigation of the relationship between risk factors and epigenetic regulation in atherosclerotic disease."
abstract_short = ""
authors = ["**van der Laan SW**", "Siemelink MA", "Haitjema S", "Foroughi Asl H", "Prerisic L", "Mokry M", "Van Setten J", "Malik R", "Dichgans M", "Worral BB", "Samani NJ", "Schunkert H", "Erdmann J", "Hedin U", "Paulsson-Bern G", "Björkegren JLM", "De Borst GJ", "Den Ruijter HM", "Asselbergs FW", "De Bakker PIW", "Pasterkamp G", "and METASTROKE Collaboration of the International Stroke Genetics Consortium."]
date = "2018-09-01"
image_preview = ""
math = true
publication_types = ["2"]
publication = "Circulation: Genomic and Precision Medicine."
publication_short = "**Circ Gen Prec Med**"
selected = true
title = "Genetic Susceptibility Loci for Cardiovascular Disease and Their Impact on Atherosclerotic Plaques"
url_code = ""
url_dataset = ""
url_pdf = "https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/full/10.1161/CIRCGEN.118.002115"
url_project = "project/genetics/"
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""

+++

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease in part caused by lipid uptake in the vascular wall, but the exact underlying mechanisms leading to acute myocardial infarction and stroke remain poorly understood. Large consortia identified genetic susceptibility loci that associate with large artery ischemic stroke and coronary artery disease. However, deciphering their underlying mechanisms are challenging. Histological studies identified destabilizing characteristics in human atherosclerotic plaques that associate with clinical outcome. To what extent established susceptibility loci for large artery ischemic stroke and coronary artery disease relate to plaque characteristics is thus far unknown but may point to novel mechanisms. </br></br>We studied the associations of 61 established cardiovascular risk loci with 7 histological plaque characteristics assessed in 1443 carotid plaque specimens from the Athero-Express Biobank Study. We also assessed if the genotyped cardiovascular risk loci impact the tissue-specific gene expression in 2 independent biobanks, Biobank of Karolinska Endarterectomy and Stockholm Atherosclerosis Gene Expression. </br></br>A total of 21 established risk variants (out of 61) nominally associated to a plaque characteristic. One variant (rs12539895, risk allele A) at 7q22 associated to a reduction of intraplaque fat, P=5.09×10−6 after correction for multiple testing. We further characterized this 7q22 Locus and show tissue-specific effects of rs12539895 on HBP1 expression in plaques and COG5 expression in whole blood and provide data from public resources showing an association with decreased LDL (low-density lipoprotein) and increase HDL (high-density lipoprotein) in the blood. </br></br>Our study supports the view that cardiovascular susceptibility loci may exert their effect by influencing the atherosclerotic plaque characteristics.
